Project Report – Password Vault (Python)

Author: Rachit Chaubey
Roll No: 25BAI10703




1. Introduction

In today’s digital life, we use many apps and websites — each needing a unique password.
Remembering all of them is difficult, and writing them down is unsafe.

To solve this, I built a Password Vault, a simple command-line tool written in Python that securely stores usernames and passwords using strong encryption.

This vault ensures that even if someone gets access to your database file, they cannot read your passwords without the master password.




2. Objective of the Project

To create a secure password storage system.

To apply cryptographic techniques like AES encryption and PBKDF2 key derivation.

To design a simple and user-friendly command-line interface for managing passwords.

To understand how secure applications store sensitive data.





3. Key Features

✔ Master Password Protection
✔ AES Encryption (CFB Mode)
✔ PBKDF2-HMAC key derivation (100,000 iterations)
✔ Encrypted SQLite Database
✔ Clipboard Copy Function
✔ Simple CLI Commands (init, add, get, list, delete)
✔ Offline, Local Vault – No Internet Required




4. Technologies Used

Python 3

cryptography library

SQLite

pyperclip

getpass

argparse




5. How the Vault Works (Humanized Explanation)

1. When you run the vault for the first time, it asks you to set a master password.


2. The master password is combined with a random salt to generate a secret encryption key using PBKDF2-HMAC.


3. Every password you store is encrypted using AES with a fresh random IV (Initialization Vector).


4. Encrypted data is saved in an SQLite database.


5. When you try to retrieve a password, the vault asks for your master password again to decrypt it.



This means:
Only you can decrypt your passwords.
No one else — not even someone who steals the vault file.




6. Command Overview

1 Initialize the vault

python vault.py init

2 Add a password

python vault.py add --service gmail --username rachit --password MyPass123

3 Retrieve a password

python vault.py get --service gmail

Copy to clipboard:

python vault.py get --service gmail --copy

4 Delete a saved password

python vault.py delete --service gmail

5 List all services

python vault.py list




7. Code Summary (What Each Part Does)

get_master_key()

Reads salt → takes master password input → generates encryption key using PBKDF2.

init_vault()

Creates database → creates salt file → asks user to set master password.

encrypt() / decrypt()

Uses AES encryption to secure and unsecure passwords.

add_credential()

Encrypts password → saves it into the database.

get_credential()

Decrypts stored password → prints it (and copies optionally).

list_services() / delete_credential()

For managing stored entries.

main()

Handles all CLI commands.




8. Security Measures Implemented

AES encryption with a unique IV for every entry

PBKDF2-HMAC with 100,000 iterations

Master password never stored

Salt stored separately

Offline storage for enhanced safety


This provides strong protection against:
. Brute force attacks
. Database theft
. Direct password exposure




9. Advantages of This Vault

Lightweight and fast

No external servers

Perfect for personal and academic use

Easy to extend with new features



10. Conclusion

This project helped me deeply understand how password managers work internally.
I learned how encryption, hashing, IVs, and key derivation protect sensitive information.

The Password Vault provides a safe and simple solution for storing multiple credentials without depending on third-party apps.
It highlights how powerful and practical Python can be for building security-based applications.

